--- 
layout: post
title: Cricket fever
wordpress_id: 76
wordpress_url: http://nibrahim.net.in/journal/?p=76
---
The first time I ever blogged was at blogger. My first post after the "hello everyone" was one criticising cricket. I detest the game for a number of reasons. My initial criticisms were based on it not being a very good "sport" but of late, the mania associated with the affair in India has forked a new set of gripes. I ignored most of them. Yesterday evening however, when the results of a Pakistan vs. India match became known, religious and nationalistic sentiments came to dominate the match.

During Ramadhan, muslims have a rather long prayer every evening around 2030. It goes on for over an hour. I try to attend these prayers in a congregation at a nearby mosque every night. Yesterday, about one third of way into the prayer, the sound of crackers and fireworks accompanied by frenzied cheering was audible outside the mosque.  This passed and the prayer resumed. Once it was over (which was around 2200), the <em>Imam</em> (leader of the congregation) warned us that there was a belligerent crowd outside and that it would be best if we waited for a while before leaving. The sight of a large number of people will beards and <em>kufis </em>would probably spark something unpleasant. No sooner had he said this that I heard some kind of ruckus outside the mosque. I don't know exactly what happened but from what I saw, some people had gotten into the compund (which was left open since construction was going on) and shouted some religious slurs. Women were praying in the basement of the mosque and the situation grew a little tense. Thanks to the intervention of some of the older people who were part of the prayer congregation, the situation was dispersed. We sat in the mosque for about 15 minutes more and then left.

The utility of cricket as a sport apart, the fanaticism of it's fans is simply ludicrous. Cricket players are stars who endorse everything from cars to biscuits and cool drinks. Most people know more about the scores and lives of cricketers than they do about anything else. An India vs. Pakistan match is seen as some kind of ideological war (recently a Hindu vs. Muslim one). People are willing to sacrifice everything from work to study just to watch that important match. I'm <strong>sure</strong> that all that time could be better spent.
