--- 
layout: post
title: Liberal values in Islam
wordpress_id: 224
wordpress_url: http://nibrahim.net.in/journal/?p=224
---
Umar Lee (a prominent American Muslim blogger) has posted <a href="http://umarlee.com/2009/01/17/rim-rand-institute-muslims/">an article</a> about the so called "Rand Institute Muslims" which has generated a bit of a <a href="http://deenport.com/iframes/viewtopic.php?topicurl=viewtopic.php?t=23445">thread on one my favourite Islamic forums</a>. The article has been rebutted pretty decently by (among others) <a href="http://www.blogistan.co.uk/blog/mt.php/2009/01/18/response_to_umar_lee_on_shaikh">Yusuf Smith's Blogistan</a>.

It sounds like a typical Wahabi screed against traditional Muslims and I don't see any need to discuss it's overall message. Articles reeking of the same venom are common on the internet and are best left unliked to. The article might have had <em>some</em> value but it destroyed even that by <a href="http://www.imanway1.com/backbiting.htm">slandering</a> someone like Shaykh Hamza which is something that Muslims are <em>VERY</em> strongly told to stay away from. Shaykh Hamza's contributions to Islam are too numerous to count. The <a href="http://www.zaytuna.org">Zaytuna Institute</a> alone is enough to mark him as one of the elect and the stuff that Brother Lee has to say doesn't really scathe him. In short, I regard his accusations as factually incorrect, Islamically errant and in very bad taste. 

Why do I take an interest then in blogging about this? Well, out of the tactless verbiage that forms Lee's post, there was one little point that I could relate to. It's about the assimilation of liberal values into the Islamic religion in these times. And this is something that worries me. 

Islam is a conservative religion and has strong positions that are contrary to modern liberal ones. Also, in general, a religion (or any moral system that purports to be something that guides society) should not be very amenable to change. It should rather have the capacity to effect change. To steer people in a certain way. While we can debate whether religion is a good thing or not (given the way atheism seems to be gaining ground), I think it's quite accepted that if you don't stick to your position but keep making compromises, your system will be ineffective as an agent of change. Like <a href="http://al-miftah.blogspot.com/2007/09/islam-not-cereal-shaykh-nuh-keller-uk.html">Shaykh Nuh (May Allah sanctify his secret) said</a> - <em>Islam is the haq. Islam is the truth, and this is the way it is. Like it. Don’t like it. Here it is</em>. It contains rules on how to coexist with people who have differing positions, how to debate, how to discuss and how to go ahead. There's no need to water it down or to change it in any way. Just because the "Moral Zeitgeist" is shifting doesn't mean Islam has to shift with it. It needs to stay it's ground and direct people towards it's teaching of what's the Good. Thanks to the actions of some groups, the mass medias lens of distortion and the rather ill informed policies of the United States and Israel, Islam name has suffered. This can't be rectified by 'changing' the religion. It needs to be corrected by showing the people (more by example than by talk) how Islam can offer a light of hope in these times. 

In these times, a lot of the support for Islamic nations comes from left leaning liberal groups and people. May Allah bless them for their concern. However, when we stand together in our calls for justice, we should understand that their values and ours are different and we should agree to disagree on some issues. We cannot, in our desire to be 'accepted' throw off the mantle of our faith. We cannot make 'alterations' to our faith to accommodate people of different opinions. We cannot even seriously consider seriously throwing away centuries of theological scholarship and radical reinterpretations of our primary texts as exemplified by people like <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amina_Wadud">Amina Wadud</a>. We cannot in our ignorance of our own faith attempt <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ijtihad">Ijtihad</a> as called of by people like <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irshad_Manji">Irshad Manji</a>. There are, at the end of the day some things which we as Muslims cannot compromise on. What's needed is to have an understanding of the points on which we agree and the points on which we disagree and work towards coexisting rather than bickering. 

Umar Lee's point on feminism and Manliness is where I find myself <em>slightly</em> agreeing. His characterisation of the prophetic companions (May Allah be pleased with them all) are totally wrong and a gross breach of adab. However, I do feel that in traditional Islamic societies these days, the traditional role of the man as the head of the family, the emphasis on the male being someone who is chivalrous, honourable and someone who can be relied upon (all virtues that the Best of creation - Allah bless him and give him peace exemplified) are being played down. I don't want to be misconstrued as being "Anti-woman" in any way. The Taliban style eradication of women from the public sphere is something that I abhor and denounce. I'm more concerned about the males than the females. The over emphasis on the yin and the downplaying of the yang is hurting the Ummah seriously. I know of many cases in my own place where women simply refuse to get married because they can't find men who are manly enough.

The ideal Muslim male is not a testosterone sweating fighting machine capable of levelling anything standing in his way. He's someone who has repose under pressure. Someone who can be relied upon and someone who lives an honourable and chivalrous life. This is under emphasised in modern Muslim discourse and I think it needs to be addressed.
