---
layout: post
title: "Sports Karate"
date: "2022-06-17 00:04:33 +0530"
---

I am a practising student of Karate and have been doing so for a long
time. I first studied Shotokan for around 7 months when I was a kid
and then after a long gap, studied kalaripayattu for 2 years. After
another long gap, I studied WTF Taekwondo for a few years and got a
first dan black belt. These days, I train in Okinawan Goju ryu. 

I moved from Taekwondo which I saw purely as a sport rather than
martial art. Both of these contribute to fitness, a sense of self
worth, and offer a way to find a circle of like minded
friends. However, only the latter provides a genuine way to learn how
to fight and provides a vehicle for an almost spiritual change. Those
are my motivations for going into martial arts and it's the reason why
I moved away from Taekwondo even after I spent quite a bit of time
earning a black belt.

One avenue for this is combat sport oriented martial arts like BJJ and
muay thai. However, I like the technicality and softer aspects of
Karate and wanted to find a good master to teach me that. I found such
a person and over the past few years have been practising Okinawan
goju ryu. More on that in a later post.

Karate is traditionally taught by studying basics (kihon) like
punches, kicks, blocks. These are combined and stylised into a fixed
series of moves called a kata. A kata is usually a series of moves
(e.g. block, counter punch, block, counter kick). They are
traditionally taught with a breakdown or interpretation (bunkai). A
dedicated and thoughtful practitioner will, over time, be able to
understand how the various things fit in together and figure out how
to make the series of moves practical. As an example, this is the
first black belt kata in goju ryu called Seyunchin
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/sF-p8Cq9jto" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The corresponding bunkai is 
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/A7ozAXBHSvw" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

With a good partner, this is an excellent pedagogical technique and
one that has been tested over the years. It also embodies the aphorism
"karate ni sente nashi" (there is no first strike in Karate). Almost
all kata start with a block or another defensive move and then moves
forward to end the fight quickly and efficiently. It also allows
constraints inside which one can get creative. 

Essentially, you learn the alphabet (kihon), the grammar (kata) and
then learn how to apply these to handle real world situations
(bunkai). Over time, you develop instincts to move forward by
yourself. All good. 

But now, comes the question of sports. There are two kinds of karate
contests. The first is the kata contest. This is a solo or group
performance of a kata. Judges award points based on various criteria
like technical skill, athletic performance etc. It's a visual treat to
see high quality kata performance especially at the world level. The
first example that comes to mind is Rika Usami performing the kata
called Chatanyara Kushanku here 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/iiiznDpoapQ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

However, thanks to the judging criteria, this is more or less like a
dance. If you compare the way in which Higaonna (who's not a fan of
sports competition) above does seyunchin and how a sports contestant
does the same kata, the differences become clear. Now, this is not say
that the athletes are, in some way, worse than the master. No. My
point is that performance kata and kata for teaching techniques are
not completely aligned and have diverged quite a bit. 

The second is the kumite contest which is a bout or a fight. Sports
karate contests are semi contact so you don't actually hit the
opponent. You hold back but if you didn't, the blow would be fatal and
it's for this that you're awarded points. This allows a "traditional"
sports style timed bout with multiple rounds to be balanced with the
idea of karate as a defensive martial art. Opponent attacks, you dodge
or block and then counter attack. Referee interrupts, awards you
points for your manoeuvre and the first starts again. The fights get
extremely technical but if you're an MMA or a boxing fan, these look
rather childish
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/w9kxtJpRmw4" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Now, if you're looking to study karate as a fighting system, the
sports line is not going to serve your purpose. A more traditional
approach would be better but unfortunately, most places emphasise the
sports angle a lot since that's what young students are looking
for. Older adults who want to get harder gravitate towards muay thai
and bjj so karate is left with children who treat it a like a sport
and masters who need to satisfy them. 

On the overall, I think the seemingly weird kumite that's part of the
contests are an ingenious way of converting traditional karate into a
modern sport but there should be no illusion that it's just a sport
with very rigid artificial rules. 

As for traditional karate, it's hard and very demanding. I can't think
of a better way to summarise this than to post a clip here of how a
traditional 80 year old master trains.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/dmDXJuewBa0" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Train hard and good luck!
