---
layout: post
title: "Why I am not an Apple enthusiast"
---

A lot of my close friends and people who I follow on the net are users of Apple products. Any conference I go to (even in India) has a large number of Apple MBP users. There are a few who run a Gnu/Linux distro on their Mac books but usually it's OSX. I recently had an email correspondence with a friend who in which I tried to list out my reasons for not liking Apple gear. This is not meant to be a rant but just my personal reasons for not owning any Apple computing products.

Firstly, I fully concede Apple makes impressive hardware. I've seen Macbook Pros take some rather rough treatment and emerge without any problems. They pay attention to all the fine details of their products which has remarkable effects. They have complete control over hardware and software which allows an "it just works" experience that's hard to match. The *technology* is extremely good (though not an undisputed winner) but my reasons for not using or recommending their products are different.

Since there's going to be some terminology issues, let me clarify upfront that I'll use free in the following paragraphs to mean [free software as defined by the FSF](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html). When I want to refer to gratis software, I'll use "zero cost". Open Source software is software that meets the [criteria described by the OSI](http://opensource.org/docs/osd) which is less ideological and more technical than free sofware. 

## Free Software vs. Open Source

I genuinely believe in the free software movement as a social cause independent of it's technological ramifications. The reasons for this are 

I like the idea of cheap commodity hardware that can be put together by anyone and on which I can install a free (and possibly zero cost) operating system and utilities to get my job done. This is extremely empowering and though we take it fore granted today, it is something that requires energy and work to keep it strong and going. This is even more important for developing countries like India. It's possible now, for a small organisation, to build a simple website based completely on free sofware (e.g. a LAMP based system) and keep it going.

Secondly, I like decentralisation especially in things that affect daily lives. I don't like the idea of a company (or a small group of companies) controlling a piece of software that's very important to people. I don't like that people should have to depend on Microsoft for a halfway decent OS keep their machines running. This is hard with hardware but much easier with software. It's perfectly fine for large organisations to have an interest in a free software project and to contribute, use, sell and support it (like with the Linux kernel) but the final "ownership" should rest with the community. 

With computers and software becoming more and more a part of our lives, it's necessary for these things to be publicly auditable by third parties so that there are no backdoors and surprises that people can spring (the [zwinky toolbar](http://www.escapistmagazine.com/news/view/96024-Zynga-CEO-Admits-to-Being-a-Scammer) comes to mind). If we all had to use a certain piece of software for a basic life function which was manufactured and supplied by a single organisation, it considerably weakens our individuality and privacy. 

Maintaining a pool of free software that's usable by anyone and [will remain so](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft) requires work. There are multiple ways of doing this. 

You can contibute to free software. 




Coming from a
developing country where proprietary software is expensive and an
effective way for large companies to squeeze whatever money local
organisation can cough up for their services, I *really* see value in
free software. Hence, I'm wary of anything that compromises this "user
freedom"[2]. I'm extremely conservative about my technology choices and
I genuinely see value in accepting a technologically inferior solution
if I'm sure that it comes with no strings attached. I adhere to this as
much as possible in my own life. I don't preach it like RMS does but
then again, he is the founder and the leader of the free software
movement and so has to I suppose. Because of this outlook of mine, I
look at anything proprietary with a jaundiced eye. That includes Apple,
Microsoft and the rest of them. I'm not above using their stuff but if I
can find an alternative (even a technically inferior one), I'll probably
use it instead of them. 

Apropos Apple all the above points apply but I have a special concern. I
don't have any of their products but have tried some of their stuff out
and I really think they are a class apart. However, my worries arise
from a longer term view. Back in the day when Woz (who is *my* kind of
hero) built the Apple ][, it was designed to be a tinkerers machine. It
awakened the engineer in many a child who received it as his or her
b'day gift. I've never had one myself but I know the feeling since my
old PC-XT back in 1990 was very open and I remember opening it up and
fiddling with it to get a hang of what was going on inside it.

This didn't make it unusable for the masses. The Apple ][ practically
created the consumer computer market with VisiCalc and a number of other
programs. They were usable but the machine didn't really stand in the
way of budding engineer. The allure of technology which many of us have
was nurtured by the machine and that's how I think computers should
be. Mark Pilgrim had a lovely post about this on his (now offline) blog.

While modern Apple computers are a lot more user friendly and powerful
than anything else in the market, I worry that they encourage the
"appliance in a shiny box" attitude towards computers epsecially in the
younger generation. This is not exclusive to Apple. When I was a kid,
the thing that introduced most kids to computers was a BASIC
interpreter. These days, it's facebook and twitter so... However, the
strongest proponent of this philosophy towards computers is, in my
knowledge, Apple.

The shift from Woz's Apple ][ to Jobs' Macintosh exemplifies this. I
worry that computers (and phones and appliances in general) are becoming
more and more closed and untinkerable. I find the idea of an app. store
which has complete control over what I can install unfair and quite
restrictive. I saw a tweet a while ago saying something like "@apple,
please implement SMS spam blocking in the next iPhone. It's a big
problem in India". My idea of a computing device is that I should never
have to do that. Someone who's knowledgeable about the phone and it's
software should have implemented it and I should be free to use his
software (if he lets me). Apple should have no say in the matter. That's
how my computer is and I want all my non trivial tech. devices to be the
same too.

I would characterise myself as a free sofware hardliner really. I'm not
preachy about it and realise that different people have different
priorities. While I would like to see the end of proprietary sofware, I
do see the value of competition and the innovation arising from there
too. 

I can see your point about wanting to use what these gadgets provide. My
own take on that is that I want those features and abilities but I want
them with unrestrictive free software. I am willing to hold out to some
degree. About 15 years ago, I didn't have access to a free operating
system that I could use on my computer. I either had to dish out money
(which the exchange rates made painful) to Microsoft to use DOS or
pirate the software and be in violation of the law. Now, I can fully
utilise my computer and not worry about either of these things. I don't
think this freedom would have come if people like RMS and others didn't
stand up and uncompromisingly fight for this. If they had settled for
the practical benefits of using non free software then, I'd still not
have to worry about Microsoft or Apple for their stuff.

Just to put things in perspective though, I'm not as sincere about this
as RMS. I own a Kindle but don't really get anything from Amazon. I use
it as an offline PDF and text file reader since my eyes hurt from
reading on the laptop for too long. Also, being a keralite, I have a
leftist streak running though me and that probably influences my outlook
quite a bit. 

Sorry if I rambled a little and I'm even more sorry if I offended you in
any way. I have rather strong feelings about this but usually just keep
them bottled. 

Take care and I hope to see you next year!


